doc/fwknop.man.asciidoc, before:

FWKNOP(8)
=========


NAME
----
fwknop - Firewall Knock Operator


SYNOPSIS
--------
*fwknop* *-A* <'proto/ports'> *-R*|*-a*|*-s -D* <'host'> ['options']

DESCRIPTION
-----------
*fwknop* implements an authorization scheme known as Single Packet
Authorization (SPA) for Linux systems running iptables, and for Mac OS X
and FreeBSD systems running ipfw.  This mechanism requires only a single
encrypted and non-replayed packet to communicate various pieces of
information including desired access through an iptables or ipfw policy.
The main application of this program is to use iptables or ipfw in a
default-drop stance to protect services such as 'SSH' with an additional
layer of security in order to make the exploitation of vulnerabilities
(both 0-day and unpatched code) much more difficult.

An authorization server *fwknopd* passively monitors authorization packets
via 'libpcap' and hence there is no "server" to which to connect in the
traditional sense.  Any service protected by *fwknop* is inaccessible (by
using 'iptables' or 'ipfw' to intercept packets within the kernel) before
authenticating; anyone scanning for the service will not be able to detect
that it is even listening.  Single Packet Authorization offers many
advantages over port knocking, including non-replayability of SPA packets,
ability to use asymmetric ciphers (such as Elgamal), and SPA cannot be
broken by simply spoofing packets to duplicate ports within the knock
sequence on the server to break port knocking authentication.

SPA packets can easily be spoofed as well (this is a good thing in this
context), and this makes it possible to make it appear as though, say,
www.yahoo.com is trying to authenticate to a target system but in reality
the actual connection will come from a seemingly unrelated IP.  Although
the default data collection method in Single Packet Authorization mode is
to use libpcap to sniff packets off the wire, *fwknop* can also read packets
out of a file that is written by the iptables ulogd pcap writer (or a
separate sniffer process that is writing packet data to a file).

Authorization packets are either encrypted with the 'Rijndael' block cipher
or via 'GnuPG' and associated asymmetric ciphers.  If the symmetric encryption
method is chosen, then the encryption key is shared between the client and
server (see the '/etc/fwknop/access.conf' file).  If the GnuPG method is
chosen, then the encryption keys are derived from GnuPG key rings.  SPA
packets generated by fwknop running as a client adhere to the following
format (before they are encrypted):

..........................
    random number (16 bytes)
    username
    timestamp
    software version
    mode (command mode (0) or access mode (1))
    if command mode => command to execute
    else access mode  => IP,proto,port
    message digest (SHA256 / SHA1 / MD5)
..........................

Each of the above fields are separated by a ``+:+'' character due to the
variable length of several of the fields, and those that might contain
``+:+'' characters are base64 encoded.  The message digest (*SHA256* by
default in all versions of *fwknop* greater than 1.9.1) allows the server
to check message integrity after decryption, and the 16 bytes of random data
ensures (with high probability) that no two messages are identical.  This
ensures that replay attacks are not possible against *fwknop*.

For each packet coming from an *fwknop* client, the *fwknopd* server caches
the *SHA256* digest calculated over the entire packet and compares against
previous packet digests in order to detect attempted replay attacks.  The
digest cache file is located at '/var/log/fwknop/digest.cache' and is not
rotated so that the detection of duplicate SPA messages is maximized. Both
syslog and email alerts are generated if a replay is detected (although this
can be tuned via the *ALERTING_METHODS* variable in the
'/etc/fwknop/fwknop.conf' file). By default, the *fwknop* client sends
authorization packets over UDP port 62201, but this can be altered with the
*--Server-port* argument. The server must first be configured to acquire the
SPA data on the changed protocol-port. Also, *fwknop* can send the SPA packet
over a random port via the *--rand-port* argument. See 'fwknopd(8)' for
further details. See the *EXAMPLES* section for example invocations of the
*fwknop* client.


REQUIRED ARGUMENTS
------------------
*-D, --destination*='<IP-address>'::
    Direct the *fwknop* client to authenticate with the *fwknopd*
    daemon/service at the destination address <IP>.  The connection mode
    is discovered by the *fwknopd* daemon/service when it decrypts and
    parses the authentication packet.

*-A, --access*='<port list>'::
    Provide a list of ports and protocols to access on a remote computer
    running *fwknopd*.  The format of this list is
    ``+<proto>/<port>...<proto>/<port>+'', e.g. ``tcp/22,udp/53''. *NOTE:*
    The vast majority of usages for *fwknop* require the *-A* argument, but
    sending full commands with the *--Server-cmd* argument via an SPA
    packet to be executed by *fwknopd* does not require this argument.

*-R|-a|-s*::
    One of these options (see below) is required to tell the remote
    *fwknopd* daemon what IP should be let through the local firewall.  It
    is recommend to use the *-R* or *-a* options instead of *-s* in order
    to harden SPA communications against possible MITM attacks.


GENERAL OPTIONS
---------------
*-h, --help*::
    Print a usage summary message and exit.

*-B, --save-packet*='<file>'::
    Instruct the *fwknop* client to write a newly created SPA packet out
    to the specified file so that it can be examined off-line.

*-G, --get-key*='<file>'::
    Load an encryption key/password from the specified file.

*--show-last*::
    Display the last command-line arguments used by *fwknop*.

*-q, --quiet*::
    Perform *fwknop* functions quietly (suppress informational output).

*-T, --test*::
    Test mode.  Generate the SPA packet data, but do not send it.  Instead,
    print a break-down of the SPA data fields, then run the data through
    the decryption and decoding process and print the break-down again.
    This is primarily a debugging feature.

*-v, --verbose*::
    Run the *fwknop* client in verbose mode.

*-V, --Version*::
    Display version information and exit.


SPA OPTIONS
-----------
*-a, --allow-ip*='<IP-address>'::
    Specify IP address that should be permitted through the destination
    *fwknopd* server firewall (this IP is encrypted within the SPA packet
    itself).  This is useful to prevent a 'Man-In-The-Middle' (MTIM) attack
    where an SPA packet can be intercepted enroute and sent from a
    different IP than the original.  Hence, if the *fwknopd* server trusts
    the source address on the  SPA  packet IP header then the attacker
    gains access.  The *-a* option puts the source address within the
    encrypted SPA packet, and so thwarts this attack.  The *-a* option
    is also useful to specify the IP that will be granted access when the
    SPA packet itself is spoofed with the *--spoof-src* option.  Another
    related option is *-R* (see below) which instructs the *fwknop* client
    to automatically resolve the externally routable IP address the local
    system is connected to by querying the 'http://www.whatismyip.com'
    website.

*-g, --gpg-encryption*::
    Use GPG encryption on the SPA packet (default if not specified is
    Rijndael). *Note:* Use of this option will require the specification of
    a GPG recipient (see *--gpg-recipient* along with other GPG-related
    options below).

*-H, --http-proxy*='<proxy-URL>'::
    Specify an HTTP *fwknopd* client will use to send the SPA packet through.
    Using this option will automatically set the SPA packet transmission mode
    (usually set via the *--server-proto* argument) to ``http''.

*-m, --digest-type*='<digest>'::
    Specify the message digest algorithm to use in the SPA data.  Choices
    are: *md5*, *sha1*, *sha256* (the default), *sha384*, and *sha512*.

*-N, --nat-access*='<internalIP:forwardPort>'::
    The *fwknopd* server offers the ability to provide SPA access through
    an iptables firewall to an internal service by interfacing with the
    iptables NAT capabilities.  So, if the *fwknopd* server is protecting
    an internal network on an RFC-1918 address space, an external *fwknop*
    client can request that the server port forward an external port to an
    internal IP, i.e. ``+--NAT-access 192.168.10.2:55000+''.  In this case,
    access will be granted to 192.168.10.2 via port 55000 to whatever
    service is requested via the *--access* argument (usually tcp/22). 
    Hence, after sending such an SPA packet, one would then do
    ``ssh -p 55000 user@host'' and the connection would be forwarded on
    through to the internal 192.168.10.2 system automatically.  Note that
    the port ``55000'' can be randomly generated via the *--nat-rand-port*
    argument (described later).

*--nat-local*::
    On the *fwknopd* server, a NAT operation can apply to the local system
    instead of being forwarded through the system.  That is, for iptables
    firewalls, a connection to, say, port 55,000 can be translated to port
    22 on the local system.  By making use of the *--nat-local* argument,
    the *fwknop* client can be made to request such access.  This means
    that any external attacker would only see a connection over port 55,000
    instead of the expected port 22 after the SPA packet is sent.

*--nat-rand-port*::
    Usually *fwknop* is used to request access to a specific port such as
    tcp/22 on a system running *fwknopd*.  However, by using the
    *--nat-rand-port* argument, it is possible to request access to a
    particular service (again, such as tcp/22), but have this access
    granted  via a random translated port.  That is, once the *fwknop*
    client has been executed in this mode and the random port selected
    by *fwknop* is displayed, the destination port used by the follow-on
    client must be changed to match this random port.  For SSH, this is
    accomplished via the *-p* argument.  See the *--nat-local* and
    *--nat-access* command line arguments to *fwknop* for additional
    details on gaining access to services via a NAT operation.

*-p, --server-port*='<port>'::
    Specify the port number where *fwknopd* accepts packets via libpcap or
    ulogd pcap writer.  By default *fwknopd* looks for authorization packets
    over UDP port 62201.

*-P, --server-proto*='<protocol>'::
    Set the protocol (udp, tcp, tcpraw, icmp) for the outgoing SPA packet. 
    Note: The *tcpraw* and *icmp* modes use raw sockets and thus require
    root access to run.  Also note: The *tcp* mode expects to establish a
    TCP connection to the server before sending the SPA packet.  This is
    not normally done, but is useful for compatibility with the Tor for
    strong anonymity; see 'http://tor.eff.org/'.  In this case, the
    *fwknopd* server uses the *fwknop_serv* daemon to listen on a TCP
    port (62201 by default).

*-Q, --spoof-src*='<IP>'::
    Spoof the source address from which the *fwknop* client sends SPA
    packets.  This requires root on the client side access since a raw
    socket is required to accomplish this.  Note that the *--spoof-user*
    argument can be given in this mode in order to pass any *REQUIRE_USERNAME*
    keyword that might be specified in '/etc/fwknop/access.conf'.

*-r, --rand-port*::
    Instruct the *fwknop* client to send an SPA packet over a random
    destination port between 10,000 and 65535.  The *fwknopd* server must
    use a *PCAP_FILTER* variable that is configured to accept such packets. 
    For example, the *PCAP_FILTER* variable could be set to: ``+udp dst
    portrange 10000-65535+''.

*-R, --resolve-ip-http*::
    This is an important option, and instructs the *fwknop* client and
    the *fwknopd* daemon/service to query 'http://www.whatismyip.com' to
    determine the IP address that should be allowed through the iptables
    policy at the remote fwknopd server side.  This is useful if the
    *fwknop* client is being used on a system that is behind an obscure
    NAT address.

*-s, --source-ip*::
    Instruct the *fwknop* client to form an SPA packet that contains the
    special-case IP address ``+0.0.0.0+'' which will inform the destination
    *fwknopd* SPA server to use the source IP address from which the
    SPA packet originates as the IP that will be allowed through upon
    modification of the firewall ruleset.  This option is useful if the
    *fwknop* client is deployed on a machine that is behind a NAT device. 
    The permit-address options *-s* (default), *-R* and *-a* are mutually
    exclusive.

*--time-offset-plus*='<time>'::
    By default, the *fwknopd* daemon on the server side enforces time
    synchronization between the clocks running on client and server
    systems.  The *fwknop* client places the local time within each SPA
    packet as a time stamp to be validated by the fwknopd server after
    decryption.  However, in some circumstances, if the clocks are out
    of sync and the user on the client system does not have the required
    access to change the local clock setting, it can be difficult to
    construct and SPA packet with a time stamp the server will accept. 
    In this situation, the *--time-offset-plus* option can allow the user
    to specify an offset (e.g. ``60sec'' ``60min'' ``2days'' etc.) that is
    added to the local time.

*--time-offset-minus*='<time>'::
    This is similar to the *--time-offset-plus* option (see above), but
    subtracts the specified time offset instead of adding it to the local
    time stamp.

*-u, --user-agent*='<user-agent-string>'::
    Set the HTTP User-Agent for resolving the external IP via *-R*, or for
    sending SPA packets over HTTP.

*-U, --spoof-user*='<user>'::
    Specify the username that is included within SPA packet.  This allows
    the *fwknop* client to satisfy any non-root *REQUIRE_USERNAME* keyword
    on the fwknopd server (*--spoof-src* mode requires that the *fwknop*
    client is executed as root).
 

GPG-RELATED OPTIONS
-------------------
*--gpg-agent*::
    Instruct *fwknop* to acquire GnuPG key password from a running gpg-agent
    instance (if available).

*--gpg-home-dir*='<dir>'::
    Specify the path to the GnuPG directory; normally this path is derived
    from the home directory of the user that is running the *fwknop*
    client.  This is useful when a ``root'' user wishes to log into a remote
    machine whose sshd daemon/service does not permit root login.

*--gpg-recipient*='<key ID or Name>'::
    Specify the GnuPG key ID, e.g. ``+1234ABCD+'' (see the output of
    "gpg--list-keys") or the key name (associated email address) of the
    recipient of the Single Packet Authorization message.  This key is
    imported by the *fwknopd* server and the associated private key is used
    to decrypt the SPA packet.  The recipient’s key must first be imported
    into the client GnuPG key ring.

*--gpg-signer-key*='<key ID or Name>'::
    Specify the GnuPG key ID, e.g. ``+ABCD1234+'' (see the output of
    ``+gpg --list-keys+'') or the key name to use when signing the SPA message. 
    The user is prompted for the associated GnuPG password to create the
    signature.  This adds a cryptographically strong mechanism to allow
    the *fwknopd* daemon on the remote server to authenticate who created
    the SPA message.


ENVIRONMENT
-----------
*GPG_AGENT_INFO* (only used in *--gpg-agent* mode).

EXAMPLES
--------
The following examples illustrate the command line arguments that could
be supplied to the fwknop client in a few situations:

Access mode examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Packet contents printed to stdout at the fwknop client when creating
an ``access mode'' SPA packet:

..........................
    Random data:    6565240948266426
    Username:       mbr
    Timestamp:      1203863233
    Version:        1.9.2
    Type:           1 (access mode)
    Access:         127.0.0.2,tcp/22
    SHA256 sum:     gngquSL8AuM7r27XsR4qPmJhuBo9pG2PYwII06AaJHw
..........................

Use the Single Packet Authorization mode to gain access to
tcp/22 (ssh) and udp/53 running on the system 10.0.0.123 from
the IP 192.168.10.4:

..........................
    $ fwknop -A "tcp/22,udp/53" -a 192.168.10.4 -D 10.0.0.123
..........................

Same as above example, but gain access from whatever source IP
is seen by the fwknop server (useful if the fwknop client is
behind a NAT device):

..........................
    $ fwknop -A "tcp/22,udp/53" -s -D 10.0.0.123
..........................

Same as above example, but use the IP identification website
'http://www.whatismyip.com' to derive the client IP address.  This
is a safer method of acquiring the client IP address than using the
*-s* option because the source IP is put within the encrypted packet
instead of having the *fwknopd* daemon grant the requested access
from whatever IP address the SPA packet originates:

..........................
    $ fwknop -A "tcp/22,udp/53" -R -D 10.0.0.123
..........................

Use the Single Packet Authorization mode to gain access to tcp/22
(ssh) and udp/53 running on the system 10.0.0.123, and use GnuPG keys
to encrypt and decrypt:

..........................
    $ fwknop -A "tcp/22,udp/53" --gpg-sign ABCD1234 --gpg--recipient
    1234ABCD -R -D 10.0.0.123
..........................

Instruct the fwknop server running at 10.0.0.123 to allow 172.16.5.4
to connect to TCP/22, but spoof the authorization packet from an IP
associated with www.yahoo.com:

..........................
    # fwknop --Spoof-src ’www.yahoo.com’ -A tcp/22 -a 172.16.5.4 -D
    10.0.0.123
..........................


DEPENDENCIES
------------
*fwknop* requires 'libfko' (which is normally included with both source and
binary distributions.

For GPG functionality, GnuPG must also be correctly installed and configured.

To take advantage of all of  the  authentication and access management
features of the *fwknopd* daemon/service a functioning iptables firewall
is required on the underlying operating system.


DIAGNOSTICS
-----------
fwknop can be run with the *-T* (or *--test*) command line option.
This will have *fwkop* simply create and print the SPA packet information,
then run it through a decrypt/decode cycle and print it again.

SEE ALSO
--------
fwknopd(8), iptables(8), gpg(1), gpg-agent(1), libfko documentation.

More information on Single Packet Authorization can be found in the paper
``Single Packet Authorization with fwknop'' available at
'http://www.cipherdyne.org/fwknop/docs/SPA.html'.

AUTHOR
------
Damien Stuart <dstuart@dstuart.org>

Michael Rash <mbr@cipherdyne.org>

CONTRIBUTORS
------------
This ``C'' version of fwknop was derived from the original Perl-based version
on which many people who are active in the open source community have
contributed.  See the CREDITS file in the fwknop sources, or visit
'http://www.cipherdyne.org/fwknop/docs/contributors.html' to view the online
list of contributors.

The phrase ``Single Packet Authorization'' was coined by MadHat and Simple
Nomad at the BlackHat Briefings of 2005 (see: 'http://www.nmrc.org').

BUGS
----
Send  bug  reports  to dstuart@dstuart.org.  Suggestions and/or comments
are always welcome as well.

DISTRIBUTION
------------
*fwknop* is distributed under the GNU General Public License (GPL), and
the latest version may be downloaded from 'http://www.cipherdyne.org'.

Commit message:

added --last-cmd argument to fwknop(8) man page via the fwknop.man.asciidoc file
git-svn-id: file:///home/mbr/svn/fwknop/trunk@196 510a4753-2344-4c79-9c09-4d669213fbeb

doc/fwknop.man.asciidoc, after:

FWKNOP(8)
=========


NAME
----
fwknop - Firewall Knock Operator


SYNOPSIS
--------
*fwknop* *-A* <'proto/ports'> *-R*|*-a*|*-s -D* <'host'> ['options']

DESCRIPTION
-----------
*fwknop* implements an authorization scheme known as Single Packet
Authorization (SPA) for Linux systems running iptables, and for Mac OS X
and FreeBSD systems running ipfw.  This mechanism requires only a single
encrypted and non-replayed packet to communicate various pieces of
information including desired access through an iptables or ipfw policy.
The main application of this program is to use iptables or ipfw in a
default-drop stance to protect services such as 'SSH' with an additional
layer of security in order to make the exploitation of vulnerabilities
(both 0-day and unpatched code) much more difficult.

An authorization server *fwknopd* passively monitors authorization packets
via 'libpcap' and hence there is no "server" to which to connect in the
traditional sense.  Any service protected by *fwknop* is inaccessible (by
using 'iptables' or 'ipfw' to intercept packets within the kernel) before
authenticating; anyone scanning for the service will not be able to detect
that it is even listening.  Single Packet Authorization offers many
advantages over port knocking, including non-replayability of SPA packets,
ability to use asymmetric ciphers (such as Elgamal), and SPA cannot be
broken by simply spoofing packets to duplicate ports within the knock
sequence on the server to break port knocking authentication.

SPA packets can easily be spoofed as well (this is a good thing in this
context), and this makes it possible to make it appear as though, say,
www.yahoo.com is trying to authenticate to a target system but in reality
the actual connection will come from a seemingly unrelated IP.  Although
the default data collection method in Single Packet Authorization mode is
to use libpcap to sniff packets off the wire, *fwknop* can also read packets
out of a file that is written by the iptables ulogd pcap writer (or a
separate sniffer process that is writing packet data to a file).

Authorization packets are either encrypted with the 'Rijndael' block cipher
or via 'GnuPG' and associated asymmetric ciphers.  If the symmetric encryption
method is chosen, then the encryption key is shared between the client and
server (see the '/etc/fwknop/access.conf' file).  If the GnuPG method is
chosen, then the encryption keys are derived from GnuPG key rings.  SPA
packets generated by fwknop running as a client adhere to the following
format (before they are encrypted):

..........................
    random number (16 bytes)
    username
    timestamp
    software version
    mode (command mode (0) or access mode (1))
    if command mode => command to execute
    else access mode  => IP,proto,port
    message digest (SHA256 / SHA1 / MD5)
..........................

Each of the above fields are separated by a ``+:+'' character due to the
variable length of several of the fields, and those that might contain
``+:+'' characters are base64 encoded.  The message digest (*SHA256* by
default in all versions of *fwknop* greater than 1.9.1) allows the server
to check message integrity after decryption, and the 16 bytes of random data
ensures (with high probability) that no two messages are identical.  This
ensures that replay attacks are not possible against *fwknop*.

For each packet coming from an *fwknop* client, the *fwknopd* server caches
the *SHA256* digest calculated over the entire packet and compares against
previous packet digests in order to detect attempted replay attacks.  The
digest cache file is located at '/var/log/fwknop/digest.cache' and is not
rotated so that the detection of duplicate SPA messages is maximized. Both
syslog and email alerts are generated if a replay is detected (although this
can be tuned via the *ALERTING_METHODS* variable in the
'/etc/fwknop/fwknop.conf' file). By default, the *fwknop* client sends
authorization packets over UDP port 62201, but this can be altered with the
*--Server-port* argument. The server must first be configured to acquire the
SPA data on the changed protocol-port. Also, *fwknop* can send the SPA packet
over a random port via the *--rand-port* argument. See 'fwknopd(8)' for
further details. See the *EXAMPLES* section for example invocations of the
*fwknop* client.


REQUIRED ARGUMENTS
------------------
*-D, --destination*='<IP-address>'::
    Direct the *fwknop* client to authenticate with the *fwknopd*
    daemon/service at the destination address <IP>.  The connection mode
    is discovered by the *fwknopd* daemon/service when it decrypts and
    parses the authentication packet.

*-A, --access*='<port list>'::
    Provide a list of ports and protocols to access on a remote computer
    running *fwknopd*.  The format of this list is
    ``+<proto>/<port>...<proto>/<port>+'', e.g. ``tcp/22,udp/53''. *NOTE:*
    The vast majority of usages for *fwknop* require the *-A* argument, but
    sending full commands with the *--Server-cmd* argument via an SPA
    packet to be executed by *fwknopd* does not require this argument.

*-R|-a|-s*::
    One of these options (see below) is required to tell the remote
    *fwknopd* daemon what IP should be let through the local firewall.  It
    is recommend to use the *-R* or *-a* options instead of *-s* in order
    to harden SPA communications against possible MITM attacks.


GENERAL OPTIONS
---------------
*-h, --help*::
    Print a usage summary message and exit.

*-B, --save-packet*='<file>'::
    Instruct the *fwknop* client to write a newly created SPA packet out
    to the specified file so that it can be examined off-line.

*-l, --last-cmd*::
    Execute *fwknop* with the command-line arguments from the previous
    invocation (if any).  The previous arguments are parsed out of the
    '~/.fwknop.run' file.

*-G, --get-key*='<file>'::
    Load an encryption key/password from the specified file.

*--show-last*::
    Display the last command-line arguments used by *fwknop*.

*-q, --quiet*::
    Perform *fwknop* functions quietly (suppress informational output).

*-T, --test*::
    Test mode.  Generate the SPA packet data, but do not send it.  Instead,
    print a break-down of the SPA data fields, then run the data through
    the decryption and decoding process and print the break-down again.
    This is primarily a debugging feature.

*-v, --verbose*::
    Run the *fwknop* client in verbose mode.

*-V, --Version*::
    Display version information and exit.


SPA OPTIONS
-----------
*-a, --allow-ip*='<IP-address>'::
    Specify IP address that should be permitted through the destination
    *fwknopd* server firewall (this IP is encrypted within the SPA packet
    itself).  This is useful to prevent a 'Man-In-The-Middle' (MTIM) attack
    where an SPA packet can be intercepted enroute and sent from a
    different IP than the original.  Hence, if the *fwknopd* server trusts
    the source address on the  SPA  packet IP header then the attacker
    gains access.  The *-a* option puts the source address within the
    encrypted SPA packet, and so thwarts this attack.  The *-a* option
    is also useful to specify the IP that will be granted access when the
    SPA packet itself is spoofed with the *--spoof-src* option.  Another
    related option is *-R* (see below) which instructs the *fwknop* client
    to automatically resolve the externally routable IP address the local
    system is connected to by querying the 'http://www.whatismyip.com'
    website.

*-g, --gpg-encryption*::
    Use GPG encryption on the SPA packet (default if not specified is
    Rijndael). *Note:* Use of this option will require the specification of
    a GPG recipient (see *--gpg-recipient* along with other GPG-related
    options below).

*-H, --http-proxy*='<proxy-URL>'::
    Specify an HTTP *fwknopd* client will use to send the SPA packet through.
    Using this option will automatically set the SPA packet transmission mode
    (usually set via the *--server-proto* argument) to ``http''.

*-m, --digest-type*='<digest>'::
    Specify the message digest algorithm to use in the SPA data.  Choices
    are: *md5*, *sha1*, *sha256* (the default), *sha384*, and *sha512*.

*-N, --nat-access*='<internalIP:forwardPort>'::
    The *fwknopd* server offers the ability to provide SPA access through
    an iptables firewall to an internal service by interfacing with the
    iptables NAT capabilities.  So, if the *fwknopd* server is protecting
    an internal network on an RFC-1918 address space, an external *fwknop*
    client can request that the server port forward an external port to an
    internal IP, i.e. ``+--NAT-access 192.168.10.2:55000+''.  In this case,
    access will be granted to 192.168.10.2 via port 55000 to whatever
    service is requested via the *--access* argument (usually tcp/22). 
    Hence, after sending such an SPA packet, one would then do
    ``ssh -p 55000 user@host'' and the connection would be forwarded on
    through to the internal 192.168.10.2 system automatically.  Note that
    the port ``55000'' can be randomly generated via the *--nat-rand-port*
    argument (described later).

*--nat-local*::
    On the *fwknopd* server, a NAT operation can apply to the local system
    instead of being forwarded through the system.  That is, for iptables
    firewalls, a connection to, say, port 55,000 can be translated to port
    22 on the local system.  By making use of the *--nat-local* argument,
    the *fwknop* client can be made to request such access.  This means
    that any external attacker would only see a connection over port 55,000
    instead of the expected port 22 after the SPA packet is sent.

*--nat-rand-port*::
    Usually *fwknop* is used to request access to a specific port such as
    tcp/22 on a system running *fwknopd*.  However, by using the
    *--nat-rand-port* argument, it is possible to request access to a
    particular service (again, such as tcp/22), but have this access
    granted  via a random translated port.  That is, once the *fwknop*
    client has been executed in this mode and the random port selected
    by *fwknop* is displayed, the destination port used by the follow-on
    client must be changed to match this random port.  For SSH, this is
    accomplished via the *-p* argument.  See the *--nat-local* and
    *--nat-access* command line arguments to *fwknop* for additional
    details on gaining access to services via a NAT operation.

*-p, --server-port*='<port>'::
    Specify the port number where *fwknopd* accepts packets via libpcap or
    ulogd pcap writer.  By default *fwknopd* looks for authorization packets
    over UDP port 62201.

*-P, --server-proto*='<protocol>'::
    Set the protocol (udp, tcp, tcpraw, icmp) for the outgoing SPA packet. 
    Note: The *tcpraw* and *icmp* modes use raw sockets and thus require
    root access to run.  Also note: The *tcp* mode expects to establish a
    TCP connection to the server before sending the SPA packet.  This is
    not normally done, but is useful for compatibility with the Tor for
    strong anonymity; see 'http://tor.eff.org/'.  In this case, the
    *fwknopd* server uses the *fwknop_serv* daemon to listen on a TCP
    port (62201 by default).

*-Q, --spoof-src*='<IP>'::
    Spoof the source address from which the *fwknop* client sends SPA
    packets.  This requires root on the client side access since a raw
    socket is required to accomplish this.  Note that the *--spoof-user*
    argument can be given in this mode in order to pass any *REQUIRE_USERNAME*
    keyword that might be specified in '/etc/fwknop/access.conf'.

*-r, --rand-port*::
    Instruct the *fwknop* client to send an SPA packet over a random
    destination port between 10,000 and 65535.  The *fwknopd* server must
    use a *PCAP_FILTER* variable that is configured to accept such packets. 
    For example, the *PCAP_FILTER* variable could be set to: ``+udp dst
    portrange 10000-65535+''.

*-R, --resolve-ip-http*::
    This is an important option, and instructs the *fwknop* client and
    the *fwknopd* daemon/service to query 'http://www.whatismyip.com' to
    determine the IP address that should be allowed through the iptables
    policy at the remote fwknopd server side.  This is useful if the
    *fwknop* client is being used on a system that is behind an obscure
    NAT address.

*-s, --source-ip*::
    Instruct the *fwknop* client to form an SPA packet that contains the
    special-case IP address ``+0.0.0.0+'' which will inform the destination
    *fwknopd* SPA server to use the source IP address from which the
    SPA packet originates as the IP that will be allowed through upon
    modification of the firewall ruleset.  This option is useful if the
    *fwknop* client is deployed on a machine that is behind a NAT device. 
    The permit-address options *-s* (default), *-R* and *-a* are mutually
    exclusive.

*--time-offset-plus*='<time>'::
    By default, the *fwknopd* daemon on the server side enforces time
    synchronization between the clocks running on client and server
    systems.  The *fwknop* client places the local time within each SPA
    packet as a time stamp to be validated by the fwknopd server after
    decryption.  However, in some circumstances, if the clocks are out
    of sync and the user on the client system does not have the required
    access to change the local clock setting, it can be difficult to
    construct and SPA packet with a time stamp the server will accept. 
    In this situation, the *--time-offset-plus* option can allow the user
    to specify an offset (e.g. ``60sec'' ``60min'' ``2days'' etc.) that is
    added to the local time.

*--time-offset-minus*='<time>'::
    This is similar to the *--time-offset-plus* option (see above), but
    subtracts the specified time offset instead of adding it to the local
    time stamp.

*-u, --user-agent*='<user-agent-string>'::
    Set the HTTP User-Agent for resolving the external IP via *-R*, or for
    sending SPA packets over HTTP.

*-U, --spoof-user*='<user>'::
    Specify the username that is included within SPA packet.  This allows
    the *fwknop* client to satisfy any non-root *REQUIRE_USERNAME* keyword
    on the fwknopd server (*--spoof-src* mode requires that the *fwknop*
    client is executed as root).


GPG-RELATED OPTIONS
-------------------
*--gpg-agent*::
    Instruct *fwknop* to acquire GnuPG key password from a running gpg-agent
    instance (if available).

*--gpg-home-dir*='<dir>'::
    Specify the path to the GnuPG directory; normally this path is derived
    from the home directory of the user that is running the *fwknop*
    client.  This is useful when a ``root'' user wishes to log into a remote
    machine whose sshd daemon/service does not permit root login.

*--gpg-recipient*='<key ID or Name>'::
    Specify the GnuPG key ID, e.g. ``+1234ABCD+'' (see the output of
    "gpg--list-keys") or the key name (associated email address) of the
    recipient of the Single Packet Authorization message.  This key is
    imported by the *fwknopd* server and the associated private key is used
    to decrypt the SPA packet.  The recipient’s key must first be imported
    into the client GnuPG key ring.

*--gpg-signer-key*='<key ID or Name>'::
    Specify the GnuPG key ID, e.g. ``+ABCD1234+'' (see the output of
    ``+gpg --list-keys+'') or the key name to use when signing the SPA message. 
    The user is prompted for the associated GnuPG password to create the
    signature.  This adds a cryptographically strong mechanism to allow
    the *fwknopd* daemon on the remote server to authenticate who created
    the SPA message.


ENVIRONMENT
-----------
*GPG_AGENT_INFO* (only used in *--gpg-agent* mode).

EXAMPLES
--------
The following examples illustrate the command line arguments that could
be supplied to the fwknop client in a few situations:

Access mode examples
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Packet contents printed to stdout at the fwknop client when creating
an ``access mode'' SPA packet:

..........................
    Random data:    6565240948266426
    Username:       mbr
    Timestamp:      1203863233
    Version:        1.9.2
    Type:           1 (access mode)
    Access:         127.0.0.2,tcp/22
    SHA256 sum:     gngquSL8AuM7r27XsR4qPmJhuBo9pG2PYwII06AaJHw
..........................

Use the Single Packet Authorization mode to gain access to
tcp/22 (ssh) and udp/53 running on the system 10.0.0.123 from
the IP 192.168.10.4:

..........................
    $ fwknop -A "tcp/22,udp/53" -a 192.168.10.4 -D 10.0.0.123
..........................

Same as above example, but gain access from whatever source IP
is seen by the fwknop server (useful if the fwknop client is
behind a NAT device):

..........................
    $ fwknop -A "tcp/22,udp/53" -s -D 10.0.0.123
..........................

Same as above example, but use the IP identification website
'http://www.whatismyip.com' to derive the client IP address.  This
is a safer method of acquiring the client IP address than using the
*-s* option because the source IP is put within the encrypted packet
instead of having the *fwknopd* daemon grant the requested access
from whatever IP address the SPA packet originates:

..........................
    $ fwknop -A "tcp/22,udp/53" -R -D 10.0.0.123
..........................

Use the Single Packet Authorization mode to gain access to tcp/22
(ssh) and udp/53 running on the system 10.0.0.123, and use GnuPG keys
to encrypt and decrypt:

..........................
    $ fwknop -A "tcp/22,udp/53" --gpg-sign ABCD1234 --gpg--recipient
    1234ABCD -R -D 10.0.0.123
..........................

Instruct the fwknop server running at 10.0.0.123 to allow 172.16.5.4
to connect to TCP/22, but spoof the authorization packet from an IP
associated with www.yahoo.com:

..........................
    # fwknop --Spoof-src ’www.yahoo.com’ -A tcp/22 -a 172.16.5.4 -D
    10.0.0.123
..........................


DEPENDENCIES
------------
*fwknop* requires 'libfko' (which is normally included with both source and
binary distributions.

For GPG functionality, GnuPG must also be correctly installed and configured.

To take advantage of all of  the  authentication and access management
features of the *fwknopd* daemon/service a functioning iptables firewall
is required on the underlying operating system.


DIAGNOSTICS
-----------
fwknop can be run with the *-T* (or *--test*) command line option.
This will have *fwknop* simply create and print the SPA packet information,
then run it through a decrypt/decode cycle and print it again.

SEE ALSO
--------
fwknopd(8), iptables(8), gpg(1), gpg-agent(1), libfko documentation.

More information on Single Packet Authorization can be found in the paper
``Single Packet Authorization with fwknop'' available at
'http://www.cipherdyne.org/fwknop/docs/SPA.html'.

AUTHOR
------
Damien Stuart <dstuart@dstuart.org>

Michael Rash <mbr@cipherdyne.org>

CONTRIBUTORS
------------
This ``C'' version of fwknop was derived from the original Perl-based version
on which many people who are active in the open source community have
contributed.  See the CREDITS file in the fwknop sources, or visit
'http://www.cipherdyne.org/fwknop/docs/contributors.html' to view the online
list of contributors.

The phrase ``Single Packet Authorization'' was coined by MadHat and Simple
Nomad at the BlackHat Briefings of 2005 (see: 'http://www.nmrc.org').

BUGS
----
Send  bug  reports  to dstuart@dstuart.org.  Suggestions and/or comments
are always welcome as well.

DISTRIBUTION
------------
*fwknop* is distributed under the GNU General Public License (GPL), and
the latest version may be downloaded from 'http://www.cipherdyne.org'.
